---
title: '50 Days of Code'
date: '2018-10-31T13:16:57-05:00'
---

Recently, I hit Day 50 of the '100 Days of Code' challenge. I've been focused
on language design, and I'd like to pause and reflect on that experience.

I started by building a language written in Ruby called
[Awesome](https://github.com/jwworth/awesome). I'd been eager to explore
language design for most of this year, and this was a great introduction. Next,
I moved into my current project, a language written in Go called
[Monkey](https://github.com/jwworth/monkey). Monkey has been a much more
challenging (I'm learning Go on fly) and satisfying endeavor. I'd like to thank
Marc-Andr√© Cournoyer and Thorsten Ball for the incredible books that guide this
journey.

Language design fascinates me. In my daily work, I live in frontend JavaScript
code. Paraphrasing Steve Jobs, it's a high floor of the technology skyscraper.
From that vantage point, crawling through a collection of tokens is
exhilarating. It's not quite low-level, but it feels that way to me.

I love how simple logic slowly builds into something mind-breaking even to most
programmers. I love how small decisions inform the user experience. I enjoy
thinking about design tradeoffs that people have grappled with since the
beginning of programming.

I hope that these projects help me write better code. I've gained a lot of
empathy for language creators and maintainers; never again will I listen
uncritically to the "this language is bad and here's why" school of thought.
It's almost always a bad argument.

This challenge has been fun, even on the days when it's hard. I'm committed to
hitting Day 100, and I anticipate spending most of that effort on Monkey.
There's much to learn.
