---
title: 'My Annual Review 2015'
date: '2016-01-01T10:48:17-06:00'
---

2016 is here!

Each year I conduct an annual review, counting successes and failures, looking
forward to the future, both personal and professional. This year I'll be
documenting the professional portion of this review here, as a time capsule of
where I am today as a programmer.

### Last Year (2015)

**I Got Promoted**

My biggest win was being promoted from apprentice to developer at Hashrocket.
Being a Rocketeer was something I wanted, and worked hard to achieve. I was
pushed by the program and myself to get to that level. I am thrilled to be a
full-time team member.

The first lesson from my apprenticeship is that **improving as a programmer is
directly related to how deep you are willing to go to understand something**.
Let's say you are pair programming and your pair uses a method you've never
seen before. Now, you have a choice: accept the solution and *ship it*, or
pause and try to understand their code.

Finding a blog post or Stack Overflow explanation of the method is a start, an
investment in yourself. Reading the online documentation is good; reading the
source code is better. Source code can be confusing the farther down you go,
but it's worth a shot.

Use that knowledge to explain the method back to your coworker, write a blog
post, prepare a lightning talk, or answer a question online, and you're on the
way to mastery. This is what defines great programmers. 

The second lesson from my apprenticeship is **don't give up**. Everybody who
has a job in this field was once a newbie, with no work experience. The most
crucial step to getting others to believe in your skills is believing in
yourself. I had moments as an apprentice where I questioned my abilities, but I
kept going. I can't overstate how important it is to keep going during those
moments of self-doubt. They are common for programmers of all abilities.

**I Really Learned Ruby**

When I started at Hashrocket, I thought I was pretty good at Ruby. I've learned
that Ruby is a vast, complex language with many dusty edges. You can learn it
fast and do some powerful things, but mastery takes years of hard work.

This year I read many books in the Ruby cannon, including *Eloquent Ruby*,
*Practical Object Oriented Design in Ruby*, *Refactoring Ruby*, and *Rails
Antipatterns*, while skimming at least a dozen more. I devoured the Ruby Koans,
Railscasts, and Upcase's Ruby materials. It paid off, and I come to my work
with a much deeper understanding of Ruby and the ecosystem.

**I Open Sourced**

This year I participated in [24 Pull Requests](http://24pullrequests.com), and
also pushed open source code to Github every day for 60 days. The latter
experience could fill a blog post of its own.

I published my first Ruby gem this year,
[Remarkovable](https://rubygems.org/gems/remarkovable).

Many of my pull requests this year were for documentation, to projects
including: Ember.js, the Ember.js website, Ruby, Rails, Pry, React.js, and
Rust. I also had my first non-documentation
[PR](https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/21944) this year to Rails, and
[another](https://github.com/ggreer/the_silver_searcher/pull/782) to The Silver
Searcher.

As of this post, I have an open [PR](https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/22010)
to Rails, which I doubt will get merged but was the catalyst for an interesting
conversation among the Rails maintainers.

**We Built TIL**

This year we built and launched [Today I Learned](http://til.hashrocket.com/).

TIL was my apprentice project, a tool for me to hone my skills and prove myself
to the team. I paired with developers across the company as well as
interviewees, and learned a ton.

TIL has grown into a beast this year, with over 450 posts. Learning a little
bit every day and trying to explain it in a transparent way is a wonderful
tool. I find it invaluable for my own learning, and am gratified that many of
my coworkers seem to agree.

**Etc.**

This year I spoke at both of Hashrocket's Miniconfs, an internal conference we
host in Florida. Public speaking is tough, and a crucial skill to hone as a
consultant.

I started co-organizing and speaking at [Vim
Chicago](http://www.meetup.com/Vim-Chicago) this year, and running the
[@vimchi](https://twitter.com/vimchi) Twitter account. Meetups gave me my start
and I am excited to help run one. I tried to attend many Meetups this year, and
encourage others to join me.

I built a Stack Overflow
[profile](http://stackoverflow.com/users/2112512/jake-worth) this year,
answering questions on my way to 500 Reputation points. The community on Stack
Overflow is a mixed bag, but the general rigor keeps the answers of a high
quality.

I wrote three blog posts for the [Hashrocket Blog](http://hashrocket.com/blog)
and more for this site. I also rewrote this blog to be responsive to mobile
using Bootstrap.

I created [Resources](https://github.com/jwworth/resources), a list of links
that I have found meaningful. I find it incredible the power of a simple list
to motivate me to pay closer attention to the resources around me.

For my personal learning, this year I got deeper into PostgreSQL, Go, and
React.js. I improved at pair programming, building strong professional
relationships, and working with clients. I [replaced all the keys on my
keyboard with blank ones](http://www.jakeworth.com/hard-mode-keyboard-edition)
and improved at touch typing.

### Next Year (2016)

My major professional goal in 2016 is to become an expert at learning languages
and frameworks. I aim to slash the time it takes me to pick up a new tool by
gaining fluency in the full spectrum of major design patterns.

Ruby is not always the best tool for the job, yet it's the sharpest tool in my
toolbox by far. I'd like to be able to look a problem and say: 'this should be
written in Go', and then also be able to lead a team building that solution.
This is the next level for me.

I will start by reading *7 More Languages in 7 Weeks* with some peers at
Hashrocket to practice rapidly picking up new ideas. After that I may read a
book on language design on our office bookshelf. By February I will be diving
into four technologies, representing areas I'm not too familiar with right now:

* Clojure (a functional language and a Lisp)
* Go (a lower-level language)
* React.js (a frontend framework)
* React Native (a mobile framework)

I have signed up for some Meetups, and have a queue of books and tutorials
ready to go. By being a faster learner, I hope to be able to better serve my
clients in a rapidly changing technological world.

### Conclusion

Thank you to everybody who helped me this year, and thanks for reading this
lengthy post. I recommend a review like this to anybody with wild aspirations;
it's helped me clarify what I've done and where I'm headed, and maintain
accountability. Look for posts in 2016 about Clojure, Go, React.js, React
Native, and whatever else I decide to hack on this year.
