---
title: 'My RubyConf 2020 Abstract'
date: '2020-10-10T00:00:00-06:00'
tags:
  - ruby
---

This Fall, I learned that I've been selected as a waitlisted speaker to
RubyConf 2020.

What's the waitlist? Conference organizers have to plan for people cancelling
their speaking slots last minute due to sickness, travel, or other issues. So,
they ask a few people who submitted CFPs to be on the waitlist. Waitlisted
speakers can be called at any time to fill-in and give their talk at the
conference (you also get a free ticket).

I was waitlisted at RailsConf 2017, and ended up being asked with about 30 days
notice to give my talk at the conference. Promotion does happen. If you accept
a spot on the waitlist, you have to prepare a talk, and so that's what I'm
currently doing.

I've tried to be transparent and inspirational about my speaking process on
this blog, and so in that spirit, and in case this talk never sees the light of
day, here's the title and abstract I submitted for consideration to RubyConf
2020.

### Title

"How Building a Guitar Made Me a Better Programmer"

### Abstract

"This Spring, in the middle of a pandemic, I built an electric guitar. I chose
the project to keep my mind and hands busy, and I learned something:
programming and guitar-building have a lot in common.

In this talk, I'll narrate the build, from unboxing to first strums. I'll share
the lessons I learned over months, and how they echoed hard-won insights I've
accumulated over almost ten years of writing code.

Programmers of every experience level will leave this talk reflecting on the
professional value of their hobbies and inspired to build their guitar,
whatever that means to them."

### Conclusion

All my CFP's include a detailed outline about what I'd like to talk about. I'm
not including that here because it has already changed a lot! I recommend
anyone submitting to a conference think about taking this extra step.
Conference organizers are looking for great talks that are also low-risk, and
sharing a detailed plan with the selection committee shows you'll actually
follow through if asked to speak.

I hope to deliver this talk, and either way, see you at RubyConf 2020.
